# tim\_editor

#### Introduction

tim\_editor is a proof-of-concept for a method which allows for order of magnitude 10^2 speedup when doing probabilistic analyses with a large steady-state timflow model in which only the resistance of rivers is being changed. This can be valuable for the calibration of large models that involve rivers with an unknown heterogeneous resistance, which is an important procedure as the bottom resistance of rivers is difficult to measure and can vary significantly over the length of the river.



#### Methodology

tim\_editor makes use of the property of timflow steady state models that they are based on large matrix operations, where setting up the matrix is responsible for a vast majority of the time used in a model run. When performing probabilistic analyses this means that by default this matrix is discarded and rebuilt for every iteration, even though some parameters can be changed without affecting the entire matrix.



In the case of the bottom resistance of a river, this change seems to be limited to a n\*n part of the matrix, where n is the order of the river element plus one. The total model matrix of a larger model has the shape N\*N, where N>>>n. By simply replacing the n\*n part of the N\*N matrix a lot of processing time can be saved in probabilistic analyses involving large timflow models. A probabilistic analysis could use the same N\*N matrix for every model realisation, and only swap out the relevant n\*n part.



Performing this operation requires several things: the re-usable N\*N matrix (referred to in the code as the base matrix), the location of the n\*n matrix in the N\*N matrix (referred to in the code as editlocs), and the actual n\*n matrix.

* The reusable N\*N matrix is generated by performing a single run of the model for the entire probabilistic analysis
* The locations of the n\*n matrix for each resistance are determined by varying that parameter in a model run and checking the locations in which the difference from the reusable matrix is nonzero, this requires one model run per entire probabilistic analysis for each parameter
* The n\*n matrix is generated by creating a model with only a single river element with the desired resistance, which matches the parameters of the river which is to be edited in the reusable N\*N matrix



This means the approximate processing cost C for r runs with x variable resistances goes from:

Ctot=C(N\*N)\*r 

to:

Ctot=(x+1)\*C(N\*N)+C(n\*n)\*r
Which leads to significant gains for analyses where r>>x.

Anecdotally, a calibration procedure with N ≈ 1000, r ≈ 6000 and x ≈ 17 went from a calculation time of 2 days and 14 hours to only taking 12 minutes. 



#### Examples

This folder contains two tim\_editor examples.



###### tim\_editor\_test\_small.py 

This example is a simple proof of concept for tim\_editor which formed an earlier step of the development process. It involves building a small model with two rivers and one polygon inhomogeneity, the only variables are the resistances of the two rivers. Consider f(x,y) to be the model which is a function of resistances x and y. This example generates the following models:

Model 1 f(x1,y1)

Model a f(x2,y1)

Model b f(x1,y2)

Model 2 f(x2,y2)



Initially, the model shows a heatmap of the difference of the tim calculation matrix between Model 1 and Model 2. The difference between models a\&b and model 1 is used to determine the editlocs (location of the n\*n matrix in the N\*N matrix) for the parameters x and y. These editlocs are then used to inject x1 and y1 into model 2, another heatmap is then shown to demonstrate that the matrices of the models post-injection are identical. Finally the script prints the indices of all the cells in the matrices Model 1 and Model 2 (post-injection), which is an empty list as they are identical.



###### tim\_editor\_test\_large.py

This example uses a model from TKI TIM2 to show tim\_editor being applied to a real case. This uses the model in ark\_model.py and the tim\_editor functions in tim\_editor.py. This example could be used in order to implement the tim\_editor workflow on any given timflow model that fits the requirements listed below. This test saves the editlocs to a file in order to realise the time saving aspect of tim\_editor, as generating them for each run would defeat the purpose. If the editlocs pickle is not found, it will first generate them (the (x+1)\*C(N\*N) part of the processing cost).



#### Requirements and limitations

* As of right now, only the river resistance can be altered, some other parameters might be usable as well but there are parameters which simply impact the matrix in too many ways for this method to be feasible
* Rivers must not cross inhomogeneity borders, note that this already (silently) causes issues in timflow models by default
* tim\_editor needs to be "trained" which involves running the model x times where x is the amount of editable rivers
* The model has to be wrapped into a form which takes a tuple of the resistances as input
* The editable rivers need to have a label in the form of "editableRiver0", "editableRiver1", "editableRiver2"
* Editable river strings may not consist of multiple line segments



